# Other considerations

The following section includes outstanding issues or topics for further consideration in this specification's 
development.

## 1. Persistent identifiers

Persistent identifiers may be desirable to include in the specification. Requiring AIPs to have objects identified using
a DOI or ARK would solve the problem of objects being labeled with only system-specific identifiers (such as an
Islandora PIDs).

When making a decision about persistent identifiers, we should consider whether they will be intended for internal 
Libary use only or if they will be used for public access as well.

Regardless of which standard is chosen, if persistent identifiers are to be used in the AIPs, the Library must be able 
to ensure that the redirect links will be up-to-date in the case of repository migration or other changes to the URL. 

### DOI

DOIs have the advantage of being widely recognized and widely used for academic information like published works and
research data. The disadvantage of using DOIs is that they are proprietary and will require a contract with a service 
provider and funding allocated depending on the number of DOIs to be created. Being managed externally does also mean 
that the Library will not have to allocate resources towards creating and managing a database of identifiers.  

### ARK

ARKs are commonly used for archival records and museum items. The advantage of ARKs is that they are free, open, and 
flexible compared to DOIs. The disadvantage is that their management would require more responsibility from the Library 
to manage and update the identifiers. 

ARKs can be maintained locally by an institution and still remain publicly resolvable at a standardized URL. For example, 
if SFU Library maintained an ARK resolver at `https://ids.lib.sfu.ca`,
 ARKs such `https://ids.lib.sfu.ca/ark:/19837/e0ab731b-2767-4983-8fb9-2975a3f0b419` can be published, if desired, in the 
form `https://n2t.net/ark:/19837/e0ab731b-2767-4983-8fb9-2975a3f0b419` as long as the host `https://ids.lib.sfu.ca` 
remains associated in the ARKAlliance's NAAN registry with SFU's NAAN, 19837. N2T commits to redirecting resolution 
requests from `https://n2t.net` to local hosts.

For ARKs that are not intended primarily for public consumption, such as those used in internal structural metadata, 
using ARKs in their URN form, without an `http` transport layer (e.g. `ark:/19837/e0ab731b-2767-4983-8fb9-2975a3f0b419`) 
will be sufficient.

The unique string that identifies an object (in the above example, the UUID `e0ab731b-2767-4983-8fb9-2975a3f0b419`) can be 
generated by the ARK service, or by any other trustworthy application. Systems such as Drupal create UUIDs for all entities 
they manage, and UUIDs can be easily generated elsewhere with a very high degree of assurance that they will be unique. 
Because UUIDs can be safely assumed to be unique, it is posible to mint an ARK incorporating them at any point in the object's 
life cycle, and update the ARK resolution service at any time. For these reasons, SFU should consider using UUIDs as the 
identifier portion of ARKs it mananges.

Maintaining a local ARK resolution service at SFU will require documented processes for the creation, maintenance (e.g., 
updating), and use of ARKs, as well as commitment to maintain the active resolution service and to preserve the data set 
that links ARKs to the current location of the objects they identify.

## 2. Metadata

Including metadata like METS could provide important information about object relationships. This could be especially 
useful for paged objects like newspapers. In Islandora, relationships are represented with platform-specific terms which 
require the inclusion of a taxonomy document to interpret those relationships. METS either instead of or in addition to 
a taxonomy description could make object relationships and structure more apparent to future users.